hello everyone Paul can hear me I can hear you yeah can you hear jittery is it okay let's see what about my volume is it good enough yeah you're all good
thank you actually get out of the camera hi everyone we are getting started how is everyone doing today all right give us a minute here as we all right give us a minute here as we get set up for our sorbonne developer Workshop we are writing our first smart contract on sorbonne and we have Morgan and Paul joining us on stream here today to do this Workshop hey Morgan hey Paul how are you all doing hey everyone doing good yeah going good here how are you new here I'm doing well I am in the SDF here I'm doing well I am in the SDF office it's been so exciting the devrel team has been expanding and we're onboarding so many new developers and it's been exciting sorbond's really changing
been exciting sorbond's really changing and we're innovating and I can't wait to see what more is going to come out of see what more is going to come out of this but all right oh you were at Paris blockchain week right Morgan so what is this that's true I yes here I feel like this is what here I feel like this is what the SDF office looks like everyone anyone yes I think we should do like a live stream tour of sdf's California SF headquarters I think that would make a fun stream everybody's work and see what they're doing just like pop around and interact with people I'd love to hear that what's with them with the Media Kit in the background yeah we'll find out with yeah I know but so many comments here cool single monitors only yeah y'all we have
single monitors only yeah y'all we have only single monitors around in office I will let them know we need curved monitors we need all that cool Tech but yeah all right without further Ado Paul Morgan I will let you all kick off Paul Morgan I will let you all kick off about this workshop and talk about what you presented at Paris blockchain week and I'll let you start off Paul cool yeah I think I'm presenting here how do I make that happen on the screen there we go yeah cool that looked like it a second ago yeah that's the one cool yeah welcome everybody good morning good evening good night wherever you happen to be welcome to live stream I'm writing your first smart contract on sorbom here's what we're gonna be going through today so first off we'll do a bit of an so first off we'll do a bit of an intro we'll talk a bit about what is sore bond for those that don't know we'll have a cool hello world demo from Morgan and we'll talk a little bit about why store Bond's important why
bit about why store Bond's important why it matters why it's good why you should build everything on it and then we'll have a bit more for Morgan on his kind of journey and how he got to sorbonne and how I got involved with all this and then Tyler will share a bit on how you can Tyler will share a bit on how you can get involved and then I will wrap up from there and we'll do some questions and stuff at the end so first off who are we right my name is Paul I will start there I'm a name is Paul I will start there I'm a Staff engineer at the Stellar development foundation which means I get to work on Soroban every day building and making it happen for all of you so I'm really excited to be here today to share some of the stuff that I've been working on what is the Stellar development foundation if you don't know and you've somehow stumbled into this stream anyway the SDF works with the Stellar Community which is all of you to build the Stellar Network the Stellar network is a fast and reliable L1 blockchain with finality in
reliable L1 blockchain with finality in just five seconds the Network's been live since about 2015. it and has seen sustained real world usage of 150 transactions a second with literally no problem just cruising along which is pretty crazy to think about it has a Global Network of anchors it's what we call which are on and off it's what we call which are on and off ramps issuing on-chain versions of assets from the real world including cash access which we'll talk about later and for the last year we've been building something new sarban so what is Soroban so sorbonne is a new add-on to the Stellar Network traditionally the vanilla stoneware Network didn't have Smart contracts there were there was a few L2 attempts right like turrets that some of you might know but they had some issues around that like atomicity yeah and other things like that so we wanted to open up more decentralized Innovation to the network and to open up new opportunities to the underserved and unbanked populations that Stellar's built to serve
that Stellar's built to serve and I mean my big thing is payments is and I mean my big thing is payments is such a small part of the financial world it's like an important thing to get right but it's just kind of the base layer of what we can build here so we announced the project that would come to be known as Soroban back in January of last year since then we've shared eight I think iterative releases yeah I want to preview eight now onto our experimental test net known as futurenet so devs can experiment learn and contribute to the design discussions we've been regularly running a program called sore bonathon we'll hear a bit more about that later from Tyler and we regularly discuss design choices and onboard new devs to the community on our Discord the community interactions with all of you lovely folks who are now in the Stellar Community sorry I don't make the rules but I will enforce them so you are rules but I will enforce them so you are going to be part of the community now the community interactions and the public input has been really exciting to see that's been my favorite part of this journey it's been absolutely mind-boggling
mind-boggling it's impacted almost everything about sorbonne right from naming to authentication how does that work to how Soroban should integrate with the existing vanilla Stellar Network and while sarban isn't tightly covered coupled to Stellar specifically it is designed to work well with the network so a bunch of stuff on that point it's written end to end in Rust for Speed efficiency and access to the ecosystem that exists there it comes with a bunch of plug and play it comes with a bunch of plug and play sdks for simple to complicated authorization models and it's built to scale right because it has to keep up with the rest of the existing Network it can't slow down the network but the thing I'm probably most excited about in store Bond and looking forward to seeing is how it's empowering all of you in the community now that you all of you in the community now that you can build on Stellar completely Unchained hey I'm sorry Unchained hey I'm sorry if I didn't make that joke Tyler said he'd fire me so it had to happen
he'd fire me so it had to happen right at this point I'd like to introduce Morgan he's a founder of useorbonda app he's a Community member who's been building some incredible stuff to help onboard other devs to Soroban and he's going to show us a bit Soroban and he's going to show us a bit about what he's been working on hello everyone I'm gonna start buying sharing my screen should have done this earlier all right so here's a thing that every developer starts their programming Journeys with we all like to say hello and we all like to say hello and we all like to say hello to the world as the very to say hello to the world as the very first thing that we do in our programs and you know almost everyone starts their Journey that way and in fact the time it takes for someone to say hello world in a specific programming environment maybe the determining Factor if they're
maybe the determining Factor if they're going to continue their Journey in that platform or not so I definitely want you guys to stick around for the rest of the presentation the rest of the talk so I'll just get started with the hello world part all right so what do we have here as Paul mentioned I am the founder of usurubond.app which is this tool that you see right here it is a developer playground for saurabhan smart contracts now what do we see on screen exactly well I'm logged in so I have access to the Gated Alpha here and I have the ability to create a new and I have the ability to create a new project so let's go ahead and do that new project pops up and let's go ahead and delete everything because we're going to start from scratch what's this environment all about well
what's this environment all about well first we have a code Editor to the left first we have a code Editor to the left here this is where we'll just put our rust slash sorobong this playground runs on Rust and the rest soar about SDK you'll as you continue your journey you'll find out that there's other sdks for sword Bond available for now we're going to deal with rust because that's the sort of reference implementation all right so we have the code editor we'll put our rest in and sort by and then we have some widgets so right now console is open code is open and let's get started with the hello world part so how do we do that in rest well I so how do we do that in rest well I guess we write a hello function and we call the print line macro and say and we call the print line macro and say hello okay compile it and that worked this is a rest program as it should be compiled
rest program as it should be compiled and I abstract all the details for creating cargo projects and the defining targets and so forth so you just sort of write some code and click compile in you know you're Off to the Races Morgan I'm going to interrupt you for just one second can you zoom in you for just one second can you zoom in a little bit more because we can't see it a little bit more how about now a lot more yeah a little bit more I a lot more yeah a little bit more I would say yeah it will be unusable if I zoom in any it will be unusable if I zoom in any further so I do apart for anyone or we can hide my face there's a or we can hide my face there's a lot of stuff on screen that's not the code so we can just sort of not the code so we can just sort of focus on the code here we go there we go sweeter like I'm almost blind and there you go okay sweet we got one confirmation I can see it fine carry on and everyone can hide the faces because like the vertical space might be useful
nothing but the screen share all right perfect thank you all right carrying on so print line hello didn't work well at least it compiled and didn't produce what we wanted why is the question and well we're working in a soybean environment right Soroban expects a certain kind of format for these things to work and everything that we want to be able to call has to we want to be able to call has to live in a contract so contracts are struck in rest we're going to declare a contract struct this name can be anything you want call contract because it couldn't come up with a better name all right so we go ahead and Define an all right so we go ahead and Define an implementation for contract let's go ahead and copy this from here
okay all right compile this again and that worked again no compiler errors but the problem is we still don't see any hellos popping up so that's not great ideally you want to work with the SDK here because you know a structure like this is not really sort of buying we got to tell it to do a little bit we got to tell it to do a little bit more so for that we're going to use the more so for that we're going to use the Soroban SDK and we're going to import the contract implementation macro and that's going to do a bunch of things but essentially this will convert this implementation right here into a Soroban contract and okay we have a few errors over here by the way Russ is super famous for really good compiler errors and in this
really good compiler errors and in this environment which is enabled by Soroban the way it's designed to leverage webassembly and rust so we'll get those beautiful and rust so we'll get those beautiful Russ compiler errors and we can see that there's some problems with the Panic implementation although it's not entirely clear what's going on so I'll just sort of skip the mystery here and solve this problem by finding this macro right here so contracts on the blockchain have to be super efficient in how to use the available Ledger space and rest programs even though they're pretty light they still carry a bunch of stuff that we don't really need as part of our contracts so to eliminate everything that we don't need and just get the rest that you know the basic rest of that is required for
the basic rest of that is required for contract logic will we declare the no STD macro this unfortunately removes the ability for us to use the print line macro to print this stuff and okay so let's get rid of that now we've back to a solid compiling contract here and let's go ahead and declare this function as a public function now we have something on screen up here that's looking like a button so in this actions widget which is sort of the a third of this interface in the middle is where you will be able to click and is where you will be able to click and interact with every function that your contract declares so our contract right here declares a single hello function we can call it and we'll see in the we can call it and we'll see in the console a return value so it's implied that a function without an explicit return value returns none in
an explicit return value returns none in rest so same applies here and we're going to return value now I guess we can leverage this return Dynamic to finally say hello to everyone tuning in and for that we will need a special type and for that we will need a special type so again since we can't use the rest strain it's unavailable we have to figure a different way to carry our information and for that we're going to use a symbol which is an efficient data type in sorobind for storing alphanumeric characters essentially all the letters of the alphabet plus the digits and the underscore so what we're going to do with symbol is so what we're going to do with symbol is we're going to initialize a short symbol that says hello and short just means that this sequence of characters will be able to fit in a of characters will be able to fit in a single 64-bit value which is pretty
single 64-bit value which is pretty important when it comes to this context let's recompile this again and oh thank you rust compiler we are returning a value so let's make sure that we declare what we're returning and let's call this all right so we have and let's call this all right so we have a return value hello from this function right here and this is sort of your basic most basic implementation of a sorobind contract that says hello to anyone tuning in now let's make it a little bit more spicy and let's use a little bit more of the and let's use a little bit more of the environment here so let's say we're going to log a value everybody loves blogging as a you know someone coming in from a web developer background I use console log all the time and console log is the best so
time and console log is the best so we have an equivalent in sorobind it's called log the log macro and we're going to declare a new function called hello2 and what are we going to do here we're going to gonna say hello to a specific name it's going to be a symbol and we're not going to return anything okay so how do we interact with this log okay so how do we interact with this log macro well it's a macro so we use a bang well it's a macro so we use a bang and then the first argument is the environment within which we're logging this value and you'll get used to this concept of every single function that your contract has that interacts with anything else anything in the outside world will have to have an environment as the very first argument it's kind of like your access to everything so log accepts the first argument being the environment so we're just
being the environment so we're just going to pass in reference to the environment next up we have a string and we're going to use hello bang and then we're going to provide the name let's compile this oh we're missing environment in this import and a handy feature is if you're having problems with a specific type or you're missing something you can go ahead and click links right inside of your compiler widget that will take you to the documentation so it's an easy feedback loop so now that we've imported an environment we can recompile this again and try saying hello to twitch I guess is where most of you are twitch I guess is where most of you are and in this console widget we can see that in between hello too which is the function that we're calling and the return value we have a log that says
return value we have a log that says hello twitch all right so I'm almost done with the first demo anyone and everyone that's tuning in you can actually test this on your phone so this is going to be a multi-modal demo and for that I'm gonna take my phone here so I just popped up take my phone here so I just popped up this share modal I'm going to take my phone this is an actual phone I have here bring up the camera hey everyone and I'll go ahead and look at the QR and I'll go ahead and look at the QR code here tap on usurabond.app and we can see we're taken to a version and we can see we're taken to a version of usurubundan app which is mobile optimized and you know we gotta work on mobile experiences just as much as a desktop experience and someone that's designing these apps we've got to be mindful that that's where our audience is so this kind of interface will allow users to test this contract anywhere
users to test this contract anywhere they are especially on the mobile phone so we have access to the same sort of so we have access to the same sort of widgets we have the console open and actions is a sheet down at the bottom we actions is a sheet down at the bottom we can go ahead and call hello like we did can go ahead and call hello like we did before quick access down at the bottom to the previously called functions and we can call hello to and let's do twitch confirm and then we can call this function with the same arguments if we want to or we can change arguments if we want to or we can change the arguments and do YouTube okay all right so that does conclude the demo everyone that scan the QR code and we're able to interact with the app here congratulations if with the app here congratulations if right now this is still in a gated Alpha right now this is still in a gated Alpha if you want access to the current build please tweet me on at sorobine Dev on Twitter and I'll make that happen
Twitter and I'll make that happen all right so I'm handing it off Back To You Paul we go okay I'm back thanks Morgan can we get the slides up again cool thank you yeah so that's Morgan has shown us the basics of Soroban but I want to go the basics of Soroban but I want to go into what actually makes it so special and what makes it so exciting here so first off it is batteries included for devs that's our goal here right when we're designing it everything we're when we're designing it everything we're thinking about designing it that's our goal and that means we're including everything from Storage to authentication and authorization Frameworks to token minting and transfers all that's baked in right it's ready to go so you can focus on your
ready to go so you can focus on your application and not spend ages trying to figure out how to like verify an ed 25519 signature right like you shouldn't have to worry about that and secondly unlike pretty much any other smart Contracting platform out there because we're launching on the Stellar Network you get access to all the existing assets on the vanilla Stellar Network and I want to address a comment in chat I think from Matthias said I should call it classic and not vanilla and I'm calling it vanilla for a very specific reason right because the existing Stellar network is not going anywhere right that's still all staying there it's not being deprecated it's not a classic thing right it's just a different flavor of the same thing it'll still be the fastest cheapest way to use the network but if you need a bit more power that's what Soroban's for okay but building on the existing Stellar Network means that from day one of launch your smart contracts can hold and use usdc right and many other assets that are
right and many other assets that are already on the network they also have access to Stellar's cash on and off ramp via our partnership with MoneyGram which gives which works in over 200 countries worldwide right so putting this together we could think of someone let's say Julia right she doesn't have a bank account she can go to her local MoneyGram location deposit cash into the kiosk she receives usdc on the Stellar Network in her wallet and now with Soroban she can take that usdc and deposit it into I mean a lot of usdc and deposit it into I mean a lot of things right whatever you're building but let's say an income generating D5 protocol where she receives a portion of transaction fees for providing liquidity right the partnership between Stellar's anchor Network and MoneyGram allows users like Julia to move cash straight from their physical real wallet to a DFI protocol and vice versa which is something that I don't think's ever been seen on any other blockchain network so far yeah and the third Point here I want to talk and the third Point here I want to talk about what makes Soroban super special
about what makes Soroban super special is the scaling optimizations that we're doing so when designing Soroban we've been able to learn from the state of the art and to learn from the state of the art and hand pick the best solutions from each one so we've designed the transaction execution model the scale across multiple cores we've calibrated the fee model to maximize throughput and minimize cost while protecting the existing Stellar Network traffic so we've designed a lot of optimizations around the contracts themselves as well that you don't see on every other chain so for example if you look at near not to pick on them I love near but they not to pick on them I love near but they do this in the near contracts you need to do your own serialization the deserialization of arguments when you get stuff in and out that means you need get stuff in and out that means you need to compile that into your contract and deploy it as well right so you need to deploy it as well right so you need to include that library in Soroban we've pushed as much as we can out to the host pushed as much as we can out to the host environment where we can say batteries included right which lets us massively reduce the contract size and you don't need to pay to deploy that code or your
need to pay to deploy that code or your users don't need to pay to run it right users don't need to pay to run it right we can take that a little bit further with built-in contracts so we have an idea in Soroban of built-in contracts similar to like pre-compiles you might know of us on other network So currently this is just for the standard asset contract and it means that it runs Ultra fast and cheap right and it lets contract standardize on the interface within the ecosystem and that's the standard asset contract that we have in Soroban is how Stellar assets are exposed in Soroban they look just like any other contract to your contract so it's really easy to integrate with existing Stellar assets the last thing here that's really cool we're actually working on solving State bloat with our state expiration model so on other chains you store some data on chain and it's there forever right well forever right in air quotes we have a rent-based system with
quotes we have a rent-based system with evictions and Restorations to ensure the Chain's working data set stays as lean as possible so once your rent expires your data gets evicted and you can pay to have it restored back on chain if you need it we restored back on chain if you need it we can do a deep dive on that another day can do a deep dive on that another day it's a bit involved and actually we're still designing some of those elements right now literally right now on the call on Discord so at this point I think Morgan can introduce this a bit how stateful contracts work on sarban and get some of the basics of those in foreign I'm Paul's back too hey Paul
I am muscle back yeah we're waiting for my screen share you are waiting for a screen share of Morgan there you go okay all right thank you anyway yeah thank you Paul so like Paul mentioned there's quite a bit of innovation going on sword I'm and the deeper you go into it the more you can sort of understand like you mentioned there's a design discussion going on right now we're about to wrap up every week I think they go on but anyhow let's discuss the sore month State of Mind specifically when it comes to storage and preserving things in The Ledger so as I open this up I want to hide my face and then focus on I want to hide my face and then focus on the code again if
all right perfect so we we're back to a brand new project I think we should rename this to so we're working on the state on the sword State okay so sooner or later every developer finds themselves in a situation where their application is not working as expected I would say raise your hand if that happened to you but I can't see you so I happened to you but I can't see you so I assume everyone's had this problem and we all know the techniques of how to solve these things like unit testing or logging intermittent values using break points is a cool way to inspect stack frames and so forth but unfortunately smart contract developers often don't have a rapid workflow for finding bugs
have a rapid workflow for finding bugs or faults in the contracts and you know this leaves them with the only option of hey I want to test something out well what do I take something out well what do I take the current code for the contract that I have and I either one of two options I have and I either one of two options I deploy this to the test net of your blockchain that you're working on and I test it against the wallet and that's going to be if you're a very efficient under a minute or it could take a little longer or your second option if the blockchain is well equipped for developers let's say you can probably deploy to a local Docker running instance so that's all fine and dandy but air is the limit and folks I guess tend air is the limit and folks I guess tend to not test as much as they're used to because of all the hurdles and so Soroban takes the challenge hit on by providing
takes the challenge hit on by providing a guest environment right in the SDK so you'll be able to see in the documentation if you follow along this path where you read a contract and immediately you read a unit test for a function and this is using your regular rust cargo unit tests with usurubon.app I leverage that functionality of the of an environment provide features to rapidly test your contracts so right here we're gonna explore we're gonna explore State because let's you know face it if we're writing hello world probably bugs won't affect anything too much if we're dealing with State then bugs all of a sudden become an issue all bugs all of a sudden become an issue all right so let's begin how do we store something on The Ledger we're gonna head and start with the same
we're gonna head and start with the same no STD so we're not going to import the no STD so we're not going to import the standard Library we're going to use the critical elements like contract implementation and environment Within you know and let's grab a simple as well you know and let's grab a simple as well from the SDK and we're going to declare another contract on track okay and then we're going to implement this contract with a couple of functions let's clear this upper way contract implementation all right so what do we want to test to right so what do we want to test to sort of showcase this well first let's compile often right never too often to compile we're going to have some data in the storage and on The Ledger and we're going to save and retrieve that data so
going to save and retrieve that data so we're going to have a couple of functions so let's declare save as the one that will put data Into The Ledger and we're gonna explore a number it's gonna be u32 now save is going to return the same number just for the sake of it I guess and we're for the sake of it I guess and we're gonna load a number environment and it's going to return that number so it's essentially save and load two functions for this contract let's compile this again make sure nothing breaks oh okay well I guess I compiled it a oh okay well I guess I compiled it a little too early let's return some value here okay so we have
we have something of an issue I remove this let's make sure this compiles again let me back out of this oh we don't need to back out of this we're we don't need to back out of this we're just not returning a value before should have trusted the rest compiler errors all right so we call save it takes in a number and by the way this is one of those nice and by the way this is one of those nice abstractions that you get with an environment like usurubund.app let's say a function takes in some arguments right in this case it takes in a number argument that's a u32 well we have a nice modal that we can input our have a nice modal that we can input our number to confirm and that's going to call our function as far as integrating into soribine
as far as integrating into soribine there's another nice feature that's part of the I guess Soroban contract specification so when you compile the contract there's some amount of that byte code that's compiled allocated for specifications so let's say save something rather save a number to The Ledger okay let's compile this again we can see that the modal now incorporates our comment for that function to describe what exactly this number does or what exactly this function does so we're going to click confirm and let's add a another specification here or the docs for this function load a number from the layer pile this again and oh it doesn't take any arguments
and oh it doesn't take any arguments it's not going to display that modal that's fine all right let's return the number as our first exercise it's gonna be u32 and 42 we got 42 in the console here and right we got 42 in the console here and right so now the magic part how do we take the so now the magic part how do we take the number that we provided in our modal here and put it into storage wow we need a certain key something to store it under and for that we're gonna declare a constant and it's going to be a symbol value that's why I'm imported symbol and it's going to be I'm not original with names under these circumstances I'm just going to use storage and over here we're going to pick the same
over here we're going to pick the same environment that we've used before for logging and we're going to reference storage okay compile this oh about the year I was expecting so storage is a method not a field as we storage is a method not a field as we can see inside of this error message we can go ahead and inspect what exactly storage is in the documentation and let's see exactly how to use it so we let's see exactly how to use it so we can see that there is a set function under storage it takes a key and a value under storage it takes a key and a value okay so with this new knowledge here since this is a method not a field we're going to call This And since we observe that it has a public function set we're going to call that set function to store what we're storing so we're going to provide storage as the key right
key right and we're going to provide number Something That We're storing or the value of this so save 42. confirm all right how do we know that we did store this how do we know that we did store this correctly well that's why we have this load function here and how do we retrieve something right we used set to store it how do we retrieve used set to store it how do we retrieve it well we can go back to the documentation real quick and see that there is a get real quick and see that there is a get function associated with storage and it returns an option that's a result that potentially has that value so there's you'll see that there's some unwrapping that needs to happen oh so we go ahead and reference that same storage call that same storage and call the get method and we want to get the value under storage the key so what do we get we get
an error because we're trying to return a u32 so let's return to u32. now we get another area that says we want to have a u32 but we get an option so whenever we're getting a value from Storage on sorobond any kind of in a store buying contract we don't know whether the value is there and we don't know whether that value is the value that we're going to return in this case a u32 or it could be a symbol we just a u32 or it could be a symbol we just don't know so we can go ahead and unwrap this option and see if that works well then there's the question of returning a result so at this point we unwrap the option we're sure that there's a value there but we're not sure whether that value is a u32 value so we can do clever unwrapping here but I'm just going to do a silly unwrapping so it panics if it's not a u32 and let's
so it panics if it's not a u32 and let's compile this again so let's go ahead and Save 111 and load okay so we just put a number and load okay so we just put a number onto The Ledger under a specific key and we retrieved that number from The Ledger we had an experiment with 420 and load the value do something else it works okay so there's a complication that I want to implement here and it's a little bit different from what we did during Paris blockchain week this is something that tolmer told me to do and so I'm just going to see if to do and so I'm just going to see if this works if it doesn't well hey this is a demo these things break so here's the gist I want to so here's the gist I want to store a number for a specific account so
store a number for a specific account so I want to store numbers under accounts I just don't want to store a single number I want to store it as many numbers as I want to store it as many numbers as I have accounts so we're going to modify this save function here a little bit we're going to take in a user argument or parameter that's called user let's type address so address refers to any valid blocking address on the Stellar blockchain and then we're going to take in a number and then we're going to take in a number we're going to return the same value and let's just see what this does so if and let's just see what this does so if I call Save I'm greeted with this second field here so use oribon you know this modal expands to however many arguments that your function takes and there's another cool abstraction here when dealing with accounts on the blockchain it can be like really tricky for someone just get getting started right how do I know how
getting started right how do I know how to generate one do I need the private or to generate one do I need the private or the secret key here that's a lot for someone that's you know into JavaScript or something so for that reason you saw a line.app completely abstracts away interactions with accounts by using just regular names so how many users does the system have it has three users Alex Bart and Cali you can select either one and that in the background abstracts it away into a specific address within the back within the current environment which is running in your browser all right so we select Alex one so nothing happened really we just you know have a parameter that we're calling this function with but we're not using it yet so let's try and use this okay so it yet so let's try and use this okay so under storage instead of putting everything into the same key under the same key let's try and
key under the same key let's try and use user okay so let's compile this thing get compiled and let's call Alex and let's do pen okay so that sort of kind of worked but how so that sort of kind of worked but how do we sort of debug this right we can probably do a log here although maybe we should just use the load function okay I'll just do a little function here so when loading previously we only had one key and we have any we only had one key and we have any number of keys that correspond to each user so instead of using storage we're going to use user here's an experiment so let's we saved I think we saved let's save 10 under Alex again so let's
let's save 10 under Alex again so let's load Alex oh we got a 10. so that worked let's try oh we got a 10. so that worked let's try Bart it trapped okay so the Trap means that the value doesn't exist but we explicitly tell this thing to unwrap not caring about the underlying value so we can go ahead and sort of test this out so here's this log macro that we used before and call this with an arrow just to have some string value in there and let's see what that returns we probably need to do some matching here
foreign type I think I'm going a little over the description here but the point being the description here but the point being is that we can store values under whatever key that we want and the key can be anything in this case I just displayed that it can be a specific address so we'll just go over each user Alex is going to have 11 Bart is going Alex is going to have 11 Bart is going to have 22 and Cali is going to have 22 and Cali is going to have 33.
33. and let's go ahead and check each one so and let's go ahead and check each one so Alex 11. okay Cali 33 and Bart is 22. so Alex 11. okay Cali 33 and Bart is 22. so this is much more elegant than what we had during Pierce blockchain week were you storing values under specific usernames thank you Tomer for this suggestion and sort of the nice deviation from the standard here from the standard here all right so that concludes my second demo for the Soroban state of mind if anyone wants to again experiment with this please tweet me on Twitter at soribandev and I'll make sure you have access thank you so much Morgan Tyler yeah let me bring Tyler onto stream howdy Tyler how are you hello all right let's bring up your screen here and nice tell us all about the 100
here and nice tell us all about the 100 million dollars two opportunities sounds very interesting so I'll let you take it off yeah don't let me talk about much they do let me talk about the money so we've got basically two main opportunities here for engaging with Soroban right now so we're in this phase between being on the future net moving to test net eventually be on mainnet later on this year but while we're in this phase of developing sarabon and really trying to understand how to build it in this malleable stage of solving difficult problems and trying to build the bless the best blockchain smart contract value transfer protocol in the world there's some unique opportunities here and I'm going to talk about two inside of this 100 million dollar Adoption Fund that the sdfs put out one is the one that I'm responsible for and that's fast cheap and out of control it's kind of a it's primarily an
it's kind of a it's primarily an educational content generation engine where you can learn rust smart contract development how those two things come together under the sorobond umbrella right now it's a game that right now it's a game that really takes you through Soroban contract development with the objective of trying to build with the objective of trying to build fast contracts cheap contracts and out of control contracts over the next few months this is we're dropping a little bit of alpha today we're going to be migrating a lot more attention to fast cheap and out of control for sorobond development Stellar Quest is going to become really for a vanilla or if you're on team classic seller that's where that education is going to be and then for Soroban related material it'll all be living on Fast cheap and out of control so make sure to keep an eye out on that and the sure to keep an eye out on that and the second one would be the Stellar Community Fund right so we got our fast Jeep and out of
right so we got our fast Jeep and out of control that would be your site for that fca00c or ooc I have all the domains for this and then the second one for the folks that are developing protocols or startups wanting to migrate existing D5 protocols Etc over to the sarban ecosystem the seller Community Fund is the place for you We've really been optimizing Anka and the team have been optimizing the Community Fund for both the vanilla classic Stellar applications as well as Soroban applications so there's a really nice clean process for getting onto the seller Community Fund getting funding for different protocols or experiments that you might have for that so those would be the two big pieces that I'd call out again the fast Jeep and out of call out again the fast Jeep and out of control for those who are either new to
control for those who are either new to rust smart contract development even is the Soroban ecosystem evolves and grows a big gap that I have felt as I've big gap that I have felt as I've explored the competitive landscape is not just teaching people how to write rust or teaching people how wasm works or educating people on D5 protocols or amms but really trying to identify where our vulnerabilities coming from how do we write good smart contracts how do we write safe smart contracts where do standards come from with someone like where open Zeppelin might have come from in the ethereum ecosystem trying in the ethereum ecosystem trying to ensure that the contracts that we're building are good so building out games and community events for tackling specific difficult problems so they're able to arrive a good documentation and standards for writing good smart contracts developing a smart contract is very different than developing just a standard application and some of those differences I don't think we've focused enough on solving
think we've focused enough on solving or teaching for especially what the fcaoc is aiming to solve for and then the Community Fund for funding folks that are actually doing application startup entrepreneurial type work so that's those make sure to check those out and I will hand it back to those out and I will hand it back to Morgan I believe all right sweet I see here Morgan you got we should definitely do weekly informal developer workshops I think that would be awesome and I think Matthias is slowly working on something that he's holding secret until he does like a heart build the beans Matthias I know do you want me to share a screen here do you want me to share a screen here Morgan I think we're good I don't have a slide to go with this it's just gonna be my saurabhan story I guess and a little background as well so no slides needed and
so no slides needed and yeah by the way very nice shout out in the Chinese or free access to viewers if you tweet at me on Twitter all right so my story about story so my developer story going back real far started as a kid with a Fascination with computers and I remember I was 14 when I wrote my first line of code and for me that was you know that experience informed what I was going to do from that point onward and I've made a career out of it in almost 20 years of a career out of it in almost 20 years of frustration followed with the joy of seeing something that you build come to life so that's I guess any developers Journey there and the reason I'm sharing the frustration with the joy part is because I feel this industry and I'm talking
I feel this industry and I'm talking specifically about the blockchain industry has not focused enough on the joy of building while providing ample frustration and you can probably see that in your own experience there's a lot so over the last two years I've tried playing around with a few smart contract platforms spending considerable amount of time with two of them and in the end I with two of them and in the end I felt a little bit like Dorothy from The Wizard of Oz in a conversation with Scarecrow and Tin Man trying to find out why one had no brain and the other one why one had no brain and the other one had no heart and in my frustration I continued looking for a platform that had both a heart and for a platform that had both a heart and a brain and just last November I found Soroban the first sore bonathon was taking place and anuhe was hosting that and it was a and anuhe was hosting that and it was a beautiful experience on GitHub you log in and you know everybody's
in and you know everybody's sort of submitting their own ideas and thoughts and experiencing the joy of development technology and right yeah so I took part in that I've jumped right on it and I found out about Soroban in the process I found out about xdr which is the data format for storing things on Stellar that Soroban uses and then I started getting into rust and it's a long journey and doing so without prior experience mind you and then lastly was webassembly the one of the key building blocks of Soroban and my first projects were very simple mostly to do with optimizations of the development workflow one workflow or another and I made some submissions along those lines I think it was five in total yeah there
think it was five in total yeah there were a lot of them actually you were one were a lot of them actually you were one of our Superstar submitters to silverwater thought if I recall yeah and it was a blast and the community on Discord was great in the community on GitHub was great people were commenting and so forth so that was a really soft and nice introduction to sort of buying nice introduction to sort of buying and my final project as part of sorbineathon I think I submitted it last day was a browser tool for interacting with the Soroban RPC server something that a lot of folks do when interacting with any kind of blockchain you don't go directly to a node you're running you go to an RPC server for y'all remote procedure call server I remember the https from Bloomberg gotta spell it out so the RPC server thing I wanted to build a great
thing I wanted to build a great developer experience for anyone building and testing their contracts because deploying the contract invoking the contract is often tricky if you want to do it with arguments and stuff and especially if you're sort of coming in from a command line and in doing that I spent countless hours working on various parts of the stack from the wasm executable to the host environment and then it hit me I realized something I had everything I needed to build a self-contained browser environment for executing and testing sort of on contracts and I just sort of blew my mind like I had everything I mind like I had everything I needed to build the perfect playground experience and perfect playground experience and so seeing how coupling webassembly the virtual machine together with sorbent host environment specification enabled
host environment specification enabled that browser-based developer tool that I had in mind and many others that you can sort of picture was my aha moment and I just started working in seeing how I could build tools with you know within the browser that required no setup no Docker I'm no fan of like all setup no Docker I'm no fan of like all these massive setups that take 10 minutes if you're efficient no nothing just sort of log into a website and start experiencing sorbine like that and I you know immediately afterwards I started building it and I started debugging and engaging the community further and the community further and this was I think in February when some of the programs that Tyler mentioned SCF I applied with use sorobond.app
I applied with use sorobond.app because at that point it was brewing for like two months and I got in and with the help of the Community Fund I was able to continue building this sort of I call it the developer playground of my dreams because it's everything I ever wanted from a smart contract playground and all of this happened like from scratch to launching a community-funded project in less than four months yeah like October not even I think it was late November yeah and then there was a gap in December and sort of you know it's like light speed so my experience so far has been Stellar and I really appreciate the community for allowing me to go through what
for allowing me to go through what I went through so thumbs up and yeah that's my Soroban story that was so wholesome and well put Morgan thank you for sharing that seriously I think there's a question here about youth sorbom where can we make token contracts on new Soroban very soon I will open it up sorry go ahead yeah I will open it up sorry go ahead yeah I'll open it up next week There's a massive update and I'm working on ever since getting back from Paris and stay tuned I'll keep you guys updated yeah I mean Morgan's all into this y'all just clarify I mean here's an awesome office now and he's like set up like an entire space and whatnot it's a whole thing you saw about is like the next big thing here in about is like the next big thing here in the store of on ecosystems you hear you heard it here first I see there's Matthias is saying that I'll blow your mind 2x Morgan thank you sore bomb plus test Runner plus Cooperative coding in that Dev environment AKA vs code live
in that Dev environment AKA vs code live share there's a lot of share there's a lot of Minds ready to be blown I think in the next few months there's so much Innovation happening in this space absolutely I'm so excited thank you for everything that you do for this Arbonne ecosystem Morgan so yeah I'm gonna bring Paul back up on here everyone hey everybody right I'm just gonna wrap up here quick yeah I hope you'll All Join the community and we can blow mines together smart contracts bring a ton of new Incredible use cases and power and Innovation to Stellar all right for me personally you know it's a hugely exciting new piece of tech right like what can I say like I'm an engineer you know I can say that storybond will allow us to bridge the disconnect between developers and people on the fringes of financial inclusion right or that there's a lot of chances to learn Tinker build earn rewards with the Adoption Fund programs like Morgan's doing
like Morgan's doing but what I will say is that I hope but what I will say is that I hope the experimentation we're all doing will lead to building real businesses real projects and real world use cases on sorbonne to help further Financial inclusion yeah if that gets you going the same way yeah if that gets you going the same way it does me then my job's done cool I can it does me then my job's done cool I can go eat dinner but like seriously you know if you're excited about this right you can start experimenting with Soroban right now right it's live running on our experimental test net called futurenet and I want to encourage you all to consider how and where you might fit into what's coming later this year when Soroban launches for real onto Stellar's net onto Stellar's mainnet and if I were you yeah start coding right check out you serve on tell your programmer friends to poke around see if it's the right time to take a look at it's the right time to take a look at stuller there's a QR code on the screen that'll take you to soarbon.Stellar.org that is the place to go to learn more that is the place to go to learn more there's links to everything you need there docs the Discord join the Discord keep up with developments all the devs that are building Soroban every
the devs that are building Soroban every day are on there answering your questions yeah thank you so much for your time I can't wait to see what you'll build back to you new here thank you so much back to you new here thank you so much Paul I do want to re-emphasize here the fact that we are building Soroban out there in the streets as I like to think there in the streets as I like to think and not in like some laboratory so everything is out there join the developer discords be active as Paul had said it best everyone on the stream that is watching or will ever come across is you're already part of the Stellar ecosystem and Community here so come on over start building tinkering and let's make this a vibrant and thriving community of developers so yeah thank you all for joining us on the stream stay tuned and we'll see you in the Discord take care bye everyone